---
layout: post
title: "An eyeopener for non-biologists…"
author: abishek
categories: [ Books ]
tags: [nonfiction, popscience]
featuredImage: "https://i.gr-assets.com/images/S/compressed.photo.goodreads.com/books/1366758096l/61535.jpg"
featured: false
hidden: false
story: true
rating: 5
---

Being one of the most influential popular science books of the 20th century, I definitely thought the book lived up to its name even while reading it over four decades after its first publication. This current version of the book does contain innumerable end-notes where Dawkins explains newer scientific revelations since the 1976 version, and offers his thoughts and commentary. In these end-notes, he also chooses to respond to his critics on any controversial remarks or quotes from the original edition.

That being said, the fundamental postulation of this book revolves around the idea that we are all not programmed to be altruistic, and anything that's evolved by **natural selection is selfish by nature** - thus justifying the title of the book, the selfish gene. The effect of a certain act by an organism, either lowers or raises the survival prospect of either the altruist, or the recipient. Based on this, the act can be classified as selfish or altruistic. To outline differences between selfish and altruistic behavior, Dawkins picks out specific observations of apparently selfish behavior in seagulls, in praying mantises and in the diving behavior of emperor penguins - where some penguins seemingly push others into the water to check for predators before diving in themselves! On the contrary, he also narrates examples of apparently altruistic behavior in the stinging behavior of bees to defend their hives, which is a suicide mission for the stinging bee more often than not. A description of the altruistic behavior of birds showing a limping distraction display to simply divert predators from its nest, and attract attention towards themselves was another intriguing example of selfless altruistic behavior to save it's young ones.

Dawkins uses the term replicators to describe genes, and the term **survival-machines** to describe us humans, inside which are present, the genes and their individual building blocks or nucleotides. <span class="spoiler"> The book offers to its readers the most congruous analogies to describe chromosomes and the ATCG nucleotides in our DNA. Dawkins describes a building, with a book case in each room, with 46 volumes of books stored in each bookcase, where the books contain the architect’s plans for the whole building - with the building being the organism, the rooms being the cells, the bookcase being the DNA and the 46 volumes of books being the pair of 23 chromosomes in humans. </span>

I found it quite fascinating that he dives further into his analogy, taking specific pages inside a specific volume of the book to explain the concepts of dominant and recessive genes, alleles, mitosis and meiosis. Since individuals receive two copies of a gene from each parent, it is essential to understand what happens if the two make contradictory recommendations - for example genes from two parents with blue and brown eyes. Is one ignored? Or is an intermediate design used for the child? These two copies known as alleles, are basically rivals in the gene pool for finding a slot for themselves on the chromosome of the next generation of the species.

In looking for an ideal unit of natural selection, Dawkins identifies **longevity, fecundity and copying fidelity** as the three paramount properties, a successful unit of natural selection must have. In that context, he also talks about copying errors during DNA replication, and provides captivating descriptions of mutations in the base sequence of DNA, including inversions, insertions and deletions in point and block mutations. Many of these terminologies were new learnings for me, and which might also be the case for anyone without a biology background.

In the next few sections, Dawkins also talks about the survival machines as a whole, with certain self-assertive view points based on his observations. In these sections, the most important points he drives home are summarized by his two quotes - “The currency used in the casino of evolution is - Survival”, and “The rabbit runs faster than the fox, because the rabbit is running for his life while the fox is only running for his dinner.” - the second one probably being my favorite quote from this book! He says that one of the most striking survival-machine behavior is it's apparent purposiveness - an aim or end in view. Also, he affirmatively attests to the idea that simulation is the key to survival and argues that the survival-machines that can successfully simulate the future, are always one step ahead of the survival machines that base their future on overt trial and error. To that end, Dawkins also justifies his claims with compelling examples of counter-measure prediction in war times, and examples of man vs machine-simulation in chess games like **‘Deep Thought’** famously beating grandmaster Igor Ivanov in 1988.

Dawkins then introduces the reader to the **ESS or Evolutionarily Stable Strategy** - which is by far one of the most important and influential concepts in evolution after Darwin. The key idea of the ESS is that genes always try to stay in the same proportions from one generation to the next, and the observed behavior of various organisms has shown to support this premise time and again. Why do lions attack antelopes, but not other lions? Since a lion attacking other lions wouldn’t be an Evolutionarily Stable Strategy. In this context, many strategies are explored and conceptualized for the reader in striking detail - <span class="spoiler"> like a strategy of picking fights with opponents smaller than you are, versus paradoxical or counter-intuitive strategies like picking fights with opponents larger than you are, dominant behaving as slave and subordinate as a master, other studies in hens, crickets, bees, the dominance hierarchy, the classic evolutionary game theory case study of an average payoff contest between hawks and doves and many more.</span>

Game theory concepts like the prisoners dilemma and others, are explained qualitatively in simple words, offering the reader countless opportunities to widen their knowledge horizons. In the last few sections of the book, it was interesting to learn that the word “meme” was actually a neology coined by Dawkins way back in 1976 but was hijacked in the internet age today! The use of the internet word “meme” is more relevant in the context of deliberate change, rather than mutation by random change as originally described!

On the basis of my engagement level and the content I chose to cover in the review, I must say that I did enjoy the first and last thirds of the book more.
