---
layout: post
title: "Bezos, his brainchild, the tenets, the conquests.."
author: abishek
categories: [ Books ]
tags: [nonfiction, biography, business]
image: "https://i.gr-assets.com/images/S/compressed.photo.goodreads.com/books/1631792766l/17660462._SX318_.jpg"
featured: false
hidden: false
rating: 5
---

The history of Amazon is one of the most iconic successes of the modern digital age considering its trillion dollar valuation, although it is vital to not ignore the fact that it has indeed disrupted, and entirely taken over tens of industries globally. The book serves as quite a detailed and revealing biography, that delivers to its readers/listeners, a view into the grandeur vision of Bezos, his ideas on what it means to be a customer focused company and raising the bar for the same. To some extent, listening to the story of this ginormous empire, seemed to me somewhat like sitting on the “It’s a small world” boat ride at Disneyland as a kid and trying to enjoy, appreciate and learn from the different scenes you see - one on the left and the next one on the right - as the never-ending musical boat-ride continues. The book similarly shows us different scenes from Amazon’s history, factually provides a few remarkable revelations on the company’s cutthroat philosophies and leaves interpretations to the reader.

In the first section, called ‘faith’, the stories of Amazon in the 90s are focussed on, highlighting Bezos’ days at DE Shaw Research, and the brainstorming of several ideas there, out of which one was to create an online ‘Everything Store’. While talking about Bezos’ introverted character with references to the ‘Myers–Briggs Type Indicator’, this section slowly unravels to the reader, the beginnings of Amazon, and what Bezos saw the company to be at that point in time. It was also interesting to learn that some of the hiring policies used during inception at Amazon, are still used till today. A few such processes are highlighted in the book - like putting prospective candidates into 4 buckets during interview processes - ‘Strong not to hire’, ‘Inclined not to hire’, ‘Inclined to hire’, and ‘Strong to hire’. Short insider perspectives into the different naming cycles that Bezos went through, before settling on the name Amazon, was quite fascinating to me - including the fact that one of Amazon’s previous names, www.relentless.com, still redirects to Amazon as of 2020. Starting with selling books, the almost-chronological narrative goes over every major stepping stone for Amazon in the 1990s leading up to the dot com bubble in 2000-2001 including - going public in 1997 at $18 a share, acquisition of Junglee in 1998, having more user generated book reviews than anyone else in the market by 1999, launching marketplace in 2000, launching personalized recommendations, introduction of free shipping over $100 that was the origins of what has evolved to be today’s ‘Amazon Prime’ and many other milestones of significance.

A few other initial acquisitions in the 1998-2000 time frame are detailed like Telebook, IMDb and Alexa Internet, along with an interesting story about Bezos’ investment in Google, the launch of Amazon Auctions, which was pretty much a direct replica of eBay's website. The author remarks on Bezos’ repeated emphasis on the value of frugality, one among the company’s 5 core values — customer obsession, frugality, bias for action, ownership and high bar for talent. Subsequently, a sixth value was added — innovation. The book also mentions the company’s bar-raiser program, which brings in trained bar-raiser interviewers in an effort to consistently grow the standard of newly hired candidates by 50% as compared to current candidates in the same role.

The first section proved to have the most new learnings for me, and it comes to a close with a fascinating description of a 2001 meeting between Bezos and the founder / then-CEO of Costco Wholesale - James Sinegal. It was interesting to learn that Bezos’ famous back-of-a-napkin ‘Virtuous Cycle’ was actually created following this key meeting that in fact discussed Costco’s business model, which was about simply bringing in more customer loyalty by cutting costs, increasing customer visits and their experience. The idea that feeding any part of the virtuous cycle would result in accelerating the loop, proved to be pivotally instrumental for Amazon in getting more value out of fixed costs, by increasing volume of sales.

The second section chronicles the next decade in Amazon’s history. Taking the reader more into Bezos’ mind, the book talks about his belief that communication was a sign of disfunction, and that they should be figuring out a way to make employees at Amazon communicate less with each other, not more. To that end, the entire company was restructured into loosely coupled Two-Pizza-Teams, which were groups of less than 10 people, who could be fed a meal with two pizza pies. With overlaps on the work front, it was entirely possible that teams would replicate each other's efforts, thus recreating darwinian ideas of the survival of the fittest in a competitive work environment. There are also mentions of the popular Jeffisms - which are basically Bezos’ unique ideas as well as his classic chastising remarks, my favorite ones being - “Are you lazy or just incompetent?” and “This document was clearly written by the B team. Can someone get me the A team document? I don’t want to waste my time with the B team document.” This section also devotes a good chunk of time talking about Amazon’s incessant churning of the next set of ideas, and executing them successfully one by one. This included the introduction of fulfillment centers throughout the US and reducing the click-to-ship time in these fulfillment centers from 3 days to just 4 hours, while the rest of the industry’s standard was 3 times higher at 12 hours. Beginnings of Amazon's jewelry business in 2004, introduction of ‘Prime’, ‘Fulfillment by Amazon’, evolution of the extremely successful Amazon Web Services (AWS) following the creation of the EC2 and S3 instance, which was way ahead of its time, Jeff’s crowdsourcing project - ‘Mechanical Turk’ - for executing jobs by hiring remote workers on-demand, creation of Lab126 and the launch of Kindle in 2007 are some of the many milestones highlighted in the book.

The final section discusses the dichotomy of whether Amazon’s ideologies are missionary - with righteous goals, trying to make the world a better place, or mercenary - running after power and would run over anyone in the way. Jeff pursuing ideas like “Your job is to kill your own business” from the book ‘The Innovator’s Dilemma’, Amazon’s success in avoiding sales tax in exchange for building an additional fulfillment center different states or working conditions at fulfillment centers also do raise questions of ethics, but the author leaves that for the reader to ponder upon. With that, I can say that I did enjoy the book, which gave a bird’s eye view into the first 20 years of Amazon. There are indeed many great ideas to pick up on, some that you may be inspired by, and others that you may deem borderline morally questionable.

PS:<br />
https://www.amazon.jobs/en/principles<br />
https://youtu.be/3kM2hFNZAio
