---
layout: post
title: "Blue Ribbon Sports to Nike - An entertaining chronicle of an 18 year long journey"
author: abishek
categories: [ Books ]
tags: [nonfiction, business, memoir]
image: "https://i.gr-assets.com/images/S/compressed.photo.goodreads.com/books/1457284880l/27220736.jpg"
featured: true
hidden: false
rating: 5
---

Shoe Dog is a term that refers to people “who devoted themselves wholly to the making, selling, buying or designing of shoes”, says **Phil Knight**, the founder of Nike, and the author of this impassioned account of an entrepreneur’s journey in creating one of the most successful brands in sport-shoes and sport-wear today. The book sequentially chronicles the events from 1962 to 1980, which were the key initial years that set the path for Nike to become an international brand.

Just reading the first couple chapters brings out the author’s sheer passion for running. He believed that if everybody ran a few miles, the world would be a better place! Being a runner myself, I felt I could relate to his zeal. These first few chapters with the author’s elaborate descriptions of his travel experiences in Milan, East/West Germany, ancient Greece, Philippines, Hong Kong, Turkey, Israel, India, Vietnam, China and Japan were most riveting!

At the tender age of 24 after multiple unsuccessful attempts at selling encyclopedias, Knight recalls his trip to Japan in vivid detail where he signs a deal with Onitsuka Tiger, one of the bigger Japanese brands of shoes in the 60s and 70s. In his mind, he’s got this cool moonshot project of creating a company in the US, which would be the sole distributor of Tiger shoes. The name of his company would be **Blue Ribbon Sports**. The book gradually takes the reader through all the toil and stumbling blocks he faced in the process. The whole narrative about hiring his close friend Jeff Johnson, as the first employee to sell for Blue Ribbon was most engaging and funny at times. The author’s appreciation for Johnson was heartfelt. He dedicates a whole sub-section to describe Johnson’s emails and relentless follow-up letters to him to emphasize the single-minded tenacious mentality of a great salesman. I seemed to enjoy these sections of the book the most. <span class="spoiler">Johnson, the company’s first employee kept track of how many shoes he sold in a week, how many shoes he sold in a day, who-wore which-product in what-high-school-race, and in what place they finished. Further he expressed interest to Phil in wanting to expand his sales territory, suggested to place ads in magazines and also open a retail store in Santa Monica, Los Angeles, which would later become the first Blue Ribbon Store. Eventually, this lead to initial successes for Blue Ribbon Sports, earning them the executive distribution rights in the entire West Coast!</span>

At this point, it was not in Phil’s interest to be a cautions prudent entrepreneur, instead he wanted to take best advantage of the situation, and put the pedal to the metal. Using his simple home schooling learnings like - “Don’t tell people how to do things. Tell them what to do and let them surprise you.”, and consistently delivering on commitments, the business scaled from selling shoes worth **$150,000 in the year 1968, to about $300,000 in 1969**. Further, chapters in the first half of the seventies decade talk in elaborate length about some painful meetings and experiences with a Japanese counterpart, Blue Ribbon’s journey in getting its popular celebrity and sportsmen endorsements, a lawsuit between Onitsuka and Blue Ribbon and a few other setbacks in the business, one of which resulted in renaming the brand from Blue Ribbon Sports to Nike - **named after the winged Greek goddess of victory** - something that was stuck in Phil’s mind for a long time since his travel to Greece.

Considering that running is a part of so many people’s lives today, and common injuries like the runner’s knee and the ITB syndrome are known well, it was indeed quite Interesting to learn that nobody knew anything about running or running injuries in the 1960s and 1970s. Running was so un-popular that this so-to-speak fringe sport, was enjoyed only by a few extremely fit and focussed individuals aiming for Olympic gold! It was fascinating to me that the Boston Marathon in 1965 had just 447 participants. Today over 30,000 take part every year!

In the 1970s, with the televising of the Olympics, and the popularization of the health benefits of running, both men and women started to take up jogging as a mechanism to stay healthy. With this flourishing trend, there was a **thriving shoe and athletic-gear industry** that sprung out of nowhere to feed this huge demand for amateur athletes. Nike was already around, and tennis players / other sportsmen were already wearing Nike shoes at that time. It was just a matter of time for Nike to create customized shoes and gear with more celebrity endorsements before seeing a rapid growth in sales and the brand itself. All of a sudden, running became a cool sport.

Nike went public in December 1980 and the rest is history. The book is quite well organized into several chapters, each of which chronicles one year of Nike’s journey in the 1962-1980 time frame. The period from 1962 to 1966 was definitely the most gripping part of the whole story to me.
