---
layout: post
title: "A what-NOT-to-do recipe book for a MedTech startup"
author: abishek
categories: [ Books ]
tags: [nonfiction, business, truecrime]
image: "https://i.gr-assets.com/images/S/compressed.photo.goodreads.com/books/1556268702l/37976541.jpg"
featured: true
hidden: false
rating: 5
---

The book was definitely one of the most gripping unusual stories of a **high-profile venture-backed Silicon Valley startup** rising to fame and losing it all due to baffling levels of disingenuity within the company. I definitely found the whole book to be pretty much a what-NOT-to-do guide if your goal is to start and sustain a business. Going all the way from having a public image of a passionate rock-star self-made billionaire CEO of a revolutionary company, to getting named among ‘World's Most Disappointing Leaders’ by Fortune magazine within a span of about 10 years, was a story definitely worth reading about at-least once.

As an introduction to **Elizabeth Holmes** - the chief protagonist turned antagonist in this true story, John Carreyrou - the Pulitzer prize winning journalist-author of this book, introduces a small anecdote from her past in his narrative that really sets the stage well. ‘What do you want to do when you grow up?’ asked a relative when she was 9 or 10 years old. “I want to be a billionaire!”, she says. And the relative asks “Don’t you want to be president?”, to which Elizabeth replies “No, the president will marry me, because I’ll have a billion dollars.” In my opinion, the two lines above, succeed in instantly conveying to the reader, the ambition and tenacity Elizabeth had at a young age. Being a straight A’s student, and extremely competitive, she was accepted into Stanford in 2002, where she wrote a patent application for an arm patch. Carreyrou takes his time to establish her smarts to the reader and also vividly describes her scintillating and convincing style of speaking. In my understanding this was one of her key characteristics leading to her success before everything went downhill.

For those unfamiliar with the company, Theranos’ value proposition was a **quick-feedback user experience for bloodwork taken from a fingerprick**, rather than waiting longer for results from a standard blood diagnostics center that uses the standard intra-venous blood draw. The company claimed to have originally developed TheraPatch - to extract blood from the skin using micro-needles, followed by a second claim for developing a more portable machine with an advanced microfluidics system. Once these ideas were abandoned, the company would follow it up with another claim of a sophisticated miniLab that could perform a full range of about 300 lab tests with just a tiny finger-prick of blood put in finger-stick samples. During this period of unrealistic claims, Elizabeth Holmes’ popularity ballooned and Theranos was valued at over 9 billion dollars!

Carreyrou’s elucidations of the series of missteps Theranos took, and his findings were very organized. The author talks about the harsh work environment, the seemingly secretive meetings, a lack of communication between teams, and a deliberate attempt by the founder to create a rivaling survival-of-the-fittest kind of environment within the company too. There is also an explicit mention of how Elizabeth used a perfect mix of contrition and charm when she was confronted with a vote to remove her as CEO.

Large sections of the book are also educative for those new to different types of lab assays. Different classes of blood tests require different methods, and once a blood sample is used to perform an immuno assay, there is usually not enough blood left to perform a general chemistry assay or a hematology assay. Carreyrou mentions Theranos’ claim, that they had supposedly solved these problems. There were other complications too, like <span class="spoiler">the issue of losing some of the blood sample to the microfluidics chip itself. The startling reveal was that, all quantitative issues were resolved by simple excessive blood sample dilution! This resulted in a lower concentration of all substances in the sample, thus reducing the quality of the test. One of the discoveries that was most fascinating to me was their calamitous quality-control mechanism, of simply deleting any experimental observations that didn’t agree with their ideal ‘desired results’. Blatantly dismissing irregularities in test results by deeming them as outliers was a definite no-no even in my high school chemistry lab class!</span> I can’t imagine how serious the implications would be, for deceit at such a high-stakes, health-critical medical device company!

Various other alarming discoveries of just about everything that was wrong with Theranos, are described in meticulous detail by the author, including a malfunctioning inbuilt heater for temperature regulation, misleading people with bloated percentage accuracies in vitamin D tests, off-the-chart incorrect sodium and potassium results, <span class="spoiler">the miniLabs having a low throughput, high error rates in blood tests, the use of expired reagents, invalid claims of detecting breast cancer before a mammogram, intentionally masking test malfunctions by simply tweaking software and the user interface, a series of wrongful terminations of employees followed by sending threatening letters to whistle blowers, unpaid bills, unhappy customers, intentional attempts to circumvent FDA consent, faking positive company reviews to compensate for all the negative reviews online, misrepresentation of profits due to the lack of a CFO</span>...the list goes on and on...

More than the minutiae of the legal battle and all the characters in this whole mess, I found Carreyrou’s general style of writing extremely engaging and it’s easy to see the author’s genuine interest in getting to the bottom of this story.
